MATLAB FS11 – Research Plan

Document Version: 1
Group Name: Bazinga
Group participants names: Bernasconi David, Frey Davide, Pietra Priska, Rihs Demian

General Introduction

It has been proved that ants follow two different paths when going out in search of food and when returning home: it doesn't matter how long the outgoing path is and how many turns it has, the incoming one will always be optimized. To afford this optimization, ants are supposed to use an approximation of path integration, supported by the use of visual landmarks. Some solutions have been presented about how ants integrate their paths, all of these solutions involve the use of one or more constantly updated vectors.

Fundamental Questions

Aim of this work is to show how the the vectors used by the ants change during time, how they are followed and which one is use in every moment. We will use the equations and the observations about use of skylight and landmarks given in the literature to create a model of moving ant, which at every time updates its vectors and follows one of them.

Expected Results

As said in the literature, the ants should follow, if present, the local vector generated by encountering a known landmark. Only when the local vector has been used (or in case there is no local vector), the insect should start following the global one, that has been generated basing on the starting position and on the skylight, and has been constantly updated.


References

Desert Ant Navigation; Wehner; 1998
Desert Ant Navigation; Wehner; 2003
Path integration in Ants; Mueller; 1988
Desert ant odometer; Wehner, Wolf, Wittlinge; 2006

Research Methods

We will create an ant positioned casually in the space. In this space we also randomly place the sun, the ant nest and some landmarks.
At first the ant creates the global vector (which is usually created and constantly updated during the outgoing path using skylight, start position and turns during the path) and starts by following it. At the first encountered landmark, the ant will start following the stored local vector, until the next landmark and so on.

The major question we like to answer are:

    How does the sun influence the ants movement during the day?
    How does the navigation system work (how they are able to return home)?
    Are there other systems for there orientation?

Other

We think we are going to make a simulation of the ants walking in the desert. Starting from random generated point (where the ants begin there journey, where the nest and where the food is). 


Ciao
